# LSA Assignment 1 - Matrix-matrix multiplication

This assignment makes up 20% of the overall marks for the course. The deadline for submitting this assignment is **5pm on Friday 1 September 2023**.

Coursework is to be submitted using the link on Moodle. You should submit a single pdf file containing your code, the output when you run your code, and your answers
to any text questions included in the assessment. The easiest ways to create this file are:

- Write your code and answers in a Jupyter notebook, then select File -> Download as -> PDF via LaTeX (.pdf).
- Write your code and answers on Google Colab, then select File -> Print, and print it as a pdf.

Tasks you are required to carry out and questions you are required to answer are shown in bold below.

## The assignment

In this assignment, we will look at computing the product $AB$ of two matrices $A,B\in\mathbb{R}^{n\times n}$. The following snippet of code defines a function that computes the
product of two matrices. As an example, the product of two 10 by 10 matrices is printed. The final line prints `matrix1 @ matrix2` - the `@` symbol denotes matrix multiplication, and
Python will get Numpy to compute the product of two matrices. By looking at the output, it's possible to check that the two results are the same.

```python
import numpy as np


def slow_matrix_product(mat1, mat2):
    """Multiply two matrices."""
    result = []
    for c in range(mat2.shape[1]):
        column = []
        for r in range(mat1.shape[0]):
            value = 0
            for i in range(mat1.shape[1]):
                value += mat1[r, i] * mat2[i, c]
            column.append(value)
        result.append(column)
    return np.array(result).transpose()


matrix1 = np.random.rand(10, 10)
matrix2 = np.random.rand(10, 10)

print(slow_matrix_product(matrix1, matrix2))
print(matrix1 @ matrix2)
```

The function in this snippet isn't very good.

### Part 1: a better function
**Write your own function called `faster_matrix_product` that computes the product of two matrices more efficiently than `slow_matrix_product`.**
Your function may use functions from Numpy (eg `np.dot`) to complete part of its calculation, but your function should not use `np.dot` or `@` to compute
the full matrix-matrix product.

Before you look at the performance of your function, you should check that it is computing the correct results. **Write a Python script using an `assert`
statement that checks that your function gives the same result as using `@` for a pair of random 5 by 5 matrices.**

In a text box, **give two brief reasons (1-2 sentences for each) why your function is better than `slow_matrix_product`.** At least one of your
reasons should be related to the time you expect the two functions to take.

Next, we want to compare the speed of `slow_matrix_product` and `faster_matrix_product`. **Write a Python script that runs the two functions for matrices of a range of sizes,
and use `matplotlib` to create a plot showing the time taken for different sized matrices for both functions.** You should be able to run the functions for matrices
of size up to around 1000 by 1000 (but if you're using an older/slower computer, you may decide to decrease the maximums slightly). You do not need to run your functions for
every size between your minimum and maximum, but should choose a set of 10-15 values that will give you an informative plot.

### Part 2: speeding it up with Numba
In the second part of this assignment, you're going to use Numba to speed up your function.

**Create a copy of your function `faster_matrix_product` that is just-in-time (JIT) compiled using Numba.** To demonstrate the speed improvement acheived by using Numba,
**make a plot (similar to that you made in the first part) that shows the times taken to multiply matrices using `faster_matrix_product`, `faster_matrix_product` with
Numba JIT compilation, and Numpy (`@`).** Numpy's matrix-matrix multiplication is highly optimised, so you should not expect to be as fast is it.

You may be able to achieve further speed up of your function by adjusting the memory layout used. Focusing on the fact
that it is more efficient to access memory that is close to previous accesses, **comment (in 1-2 sentences) on which ordering for each matrix you would expect to lead to the fastest
matric-vector multiplication**.

