# LSA Assignment 4 - Solving a finite element system

This assignment makes up 30% of the overall marks for the course. The deadline for submitting this assignment is **5pm on Friday 1 September 2023**.

Coursework is to be submitted using the link on Moodle. You should submit a single pdf file containing your code, the output when you run your code, and your answers
to any text questions included in the assessment. The easiest ways to create this file are:

- Write your code and answers in a Jupyter notebook, then select File -> Download as -> PDF via LaTeX (.pdf).
- Write your code and answers on Google Colab, then select File -> Print, and print it as a pdf.

Tasks you are required to carry out and questions you are required to answer are shown in bold below.

## The assignment

In this assignment, we will look at solving the matrix-vector problem

$$Ax=b,$$

where $A$ is an $n$ by $n$ matrix and $b$ is a vector with $n$ entries. The entries $a_{ij}$ (with $0\leqslant i,j\leqslant n-1$) of A and $b_j$ of $b$ are given by:

$$\begin{align*}
a_{ij} &=
\begin{cases}
1&i=j\\
1&i=n-1\text{ and }j=0\\
1&i=n-1\text{ and }j=1\\
1&i=n-2\text{ and }j=0\\
1&i=0\text{ and }j=n-1\\
1&i=1\text{ and }j=n-1\\
1&i=0\text{ and }j=n-2\\
-1/i&i=j+1\\
-1/j&i+1=j\\
0&\text{otherwise}
\end{cases}\\[3mm]
b_j &= 1.
\end{align*}$$

For example, if $n=6$, then the matrix is

$$\begin{pmatrix}
2&-1&0&0&1&1\\
-1&2&-0.5&0&0&1\\
0&-0.5&2&-0.33333333&0&0\\
0&0&-0.33333333&2&-0.25&0\\
1&0&0&-0.25&2&-0.2\\
1&1&0&0&-0.2&2
\end{pmatrix}$$

### Part 1: creating a matrix and vector
**Write a function that takes $N$ as an input and returns the matrix $\mathrm{A}$ and the vector $\mathbf{b}$**. The matrix should be stored using an appropriate sparse format - you may use Scipy for this, and do not need to implement your own format.

### Part 2: comparing solvers and preconditioners
In this section, your task is to evaluate the performance of various matrix-vector solvers.
To do this, **solve the matrix-vector problem with small to medium sized value of $N$ using a range of different solvers of your choice,
measuring factors you deem to be important for your evaluation.** These factors should include
the time taken by the solver, and may additionally include many other things such as the number of
iterations taken by an iterative solver, or the size of the residual after each iteration.
**Make a set of plots that show the measurements you have made and allow you to compare the solvers**.

You should compare at least five matrix-vector solvers: at least two of these should be iterative
solvers, and at least one should be a direct solver. You can use solvers from the Scipy
library. (You may optionally use additional solvers from other linear algebra
libraries such as PETSc, but you do not need to do this to achieve high marks.
You should use solvers from these libraries and do not need to implement your own solvers.)
For two of the iterative solvers you have chosen to use,
**repeat the comparisons with three different choices of preconditioner**.

Based on your experiments, **pick a solver** (and a preconditioner if it improves the solver)
that you think is most appropriate to solve this matrix-vector problem. **Explain, making use
of the data from your experiments, why this is the best solver for this problem**.

### Part 3: increasing $N$
In this section, you are going to use the solver you picked in part 3 to compute the solution
for larger values of $N$.

For a range of values of $N$ from small to large, **compute the solution to the matrix-vector
problem**. **Measure the time taken to compute this solution**.
**Make a plot showing the time taken and error as $N$ is increased**.

Using your plots, **estimate the complexity of the solver you are using** (ie is it $\mathcal{O}(N)$?
Is it $\mathcal{O}(N^2)$?). Briefly (1-2 sentences)
**comment on how you have made these estimates of the complexity and order.**

### Part 4: parallelisation
In this section, we will consider how your solution method could be parallelised; you do not need,
however, to implement a parallel version of your solution method.

**Comment on how your solution method could be parallelised.** Which parts (if any) would be trivial
to parallelise? Which parts (if any) would be difficult to parallelise? By how much would you expect
parallelisation to speed up your solution method?

If in part 3 you used a solver that we have not studied in lectures, you can discuss different solvers in parts 3 and 4.
