# Class 4 (Monday 31 October)

These tasks are designed to be worked on in the practical class on Monday 31 October.

In this class, we will make heavy use of the [finite difference code for solving a Poisson problem](TODO: add link)
that we wrote in lectures. You can find this code [here](TODO: add link).

## Comparing dense and sparse storage
Copy the codes we that wrote to generate the matrix in dense and sparse formats.

For a sensible range of $N$, create a plot that shows the memory used by the dense and COO sparse format against $N$.
What do you notice?

Use `scipy.sparse.spsolve` and `numpy.linalg.solve` to solve the problem for a range of values of $N$.
Plot the time both solution methods taks against $N$.
What do you notice?

## Comparing sparse formats
SciPy can convert between different sparse formats, for example

```python
matrix = coo_matrix(...)
csr_mat = matrix.tocsr()
```

For a range of values of $N$, measure how much storage space is needed to store the matrix for the Poisson problem. Make a plot
showing the amount of memory needed vs $N$. Which format is the most memory efficient?

## When is a sparse matrix worth it?
In this section, we will investigate how many zeros we need a matrix to have for sparse storage to be worth doing.

Create a 10 by 10 matrix which is all zeros except for $M$ random numbers in random positions.
Measure the amount of memory needed to store this as a dense and a sparse matrix.
Make a plot showing the amount of memory needed against $M$.
What proportion of the matrix needs to be zeros for sparse storage to use less space?

Repeat this with a 40 by 40 matrix.
What proportion of the matrix needs to be zeros for sparse storage to use less space?
